Directorate General of Foreign Trade
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Government of India
E-Commerce Exports
Handbook for MSMEs
. E-Commerce would account for around
. 6.6% of overall global merchandise trade.
India has set a target of USD 1 Trillion of India’s share in the growing E-Commerce
merchandise exports by 2030 aiming for a Exports segment is also poised to grow at
compounded annual growth rate of an accelerated pace.
12.2%. To achieve these targets, export
growth is expected from new and This handbook by Directorate General of
emerging sources. One such source is Foreign Trade offers an introduction to
Cross-border E-Commerce trade. Cross-border E-Commerce, and the
Global Cross-border E-Commerce is benefits & opportunities that Cross-border
estimated to grow to USD 800 Billion by E-Commerce offers to new Entrepreneurs
2025 and up to USD 2 Trillion by 2030. and Exporters.
Integrated Market Research, Payment Integrated
Marketing & Branding Integration Logistic Service
Exporters/Sellers/ Customers
Brands
Market Research Marketing Payments Logistics
Figure 1: Selling through E-Commerce vs Non E-Commerce
E-Commerce offers access to a larger marketing, pick-up & delivery as well as
global market in addition to domestic receive and reconcile the export payments.
sales. As shown in figure 1, the sellers on This results in reduced time & cost for the
E-Commerce platforms can utilise a suite seller, allowing more time & focus on their
of integrated service such as - cataloguing, product, packaging, marketing etc.
ecremmoC-E
ecremmoC-E
noN
W
ith the launch of the New Foreign
Trade Policy 2023, Government of
1
Fostering E-Commerce Exports through DGFT Initiatives
The Foreign Trade Policy(FTP) 2023 has Industry Partners, and Knowledge
a stated objective to enable cross-border Partners, with an emphasis on creating
E-Commerce for artisans, weavers, awareness & skills, and knowledge-sharing
craftsmen and MSMEs, in coordination with exporters and entrepreneurs.
with stakeholder Departments.
DGFT is also working with government
DGFT Regional Authorities are working stakeholders to resolve payment and
to actively promote E-Commerce Exports banking issues, Customs-related matters to
through collaborative efforts with provide a leveled platform to E-Commerce
Customs Authorities, Department of Posts Exporters.
Access to a larger international market
Direct to Consumer sales provide better margins
E-Commerce has lesser infrastructure costs
compared to traditional export
Global reach enhances brand visibility, creates awareness
of international quality standards & latest trends.
Exporters can overcome domestic seasonality
and demand fluctuations
Figure 2: Advantages of Selling through E-Commerce
Globally around two-thirds of
international parcels weighing up to 2
kilograms are shipped through Postal
route. To provide a similar competitive
advantage in India and to accelerate DGFT endeavours to work with the
India’s export growth through the Postal regional Dak Niryat Kendras to facilitate
Route, Department of Post is expanding new entrepreneurs for increasing B2C
India’s postal export network in a hub- Exports through the Postal Route.
and-spoke model by linking the Dak
Niryat Kendras (DNKs) to Foreign Post In the next few pages we provide some
Offices(FPOs). The target for year 2023 is details that would be helpful for new E-
to operatialise 1000+ DNKs. Commerce Entrepreneurs and Exporters.
2
What to Sell
Focus - on India’s Strengths Explore Foreign Demand Sources
India has a comparative advantage in The next step towards exporting is to
certain sectors/ products. Focusing on analyse the foreign demand for the
these sectors/ products will enable the product and target the market segments,
seller to garner higher profit margins, age-groups that are best suited for your
establish their brand identity and would product.
require lesser marketing/ promotion as To understand the product or market
such Indian products are already well of your interest browse through the E-
recognised. The following is a list of such Commerce platforms of the country to
sectors: check the demand and pricing of
similar products.
Textiles, handloom and apparel Actively visit and attend Trade Fairs,
Leather & Leather goods Buyer-Seller Meets, Reverse Buyers
Handicrafts and Home Décor Seller Meets both in India and abroad.
Beauty and Personal care
Semi-precious jewellery & accessories
Automotive parts
Ayush and Herbal products
Spices and food products
Tea and Coffee
Engineering goods
Religious artifacts
Figure 3 : High Potential Export Products From India
3
Check on Regulatory Requirements for Exports
Before venturing into exports, one basic Exporter must be aware of the following:
requirement is to know the Indian Tariff Export Policy: Exporters must be well
Classification (Harmonised System) aware of the export policy related to
ITC(HS) of a product. You may search their products. (as shown in figure 4)
for the ITC(HS) on the Customs (CBIC) Certification Requirement: Partner
or DGFT website. Government Agency (PGA)
certification requirement applicable
Based on the ITC(HS) classification the on the exported products. For
regulatory requirements for export from example- for pharma exports,
India and requirements at buyers’ country certification is required from Central
need to be confirmed. Non-compliance Drugs Standard Control Organisation
can result in penalties in India or issues (CDSCO), Organic exports are
at the country of import. certified by APEDA, etc.
The export of goods is governed by the export policy notified by DGFT,
from time to time. On the basis of ITC(HS) classification, the Export Policy
broadly classifies the goods as 'Free', 'Restricted' and 'Prohibited'.
Free Restricted Prohibited
An Export These items cannot be
All goods can be
Authorisation is exported at all. Such
exported freely if they
required to export items are limited in
are not mentioned
restricted goods, and number and include
specifically in the
must be exported as parts of wild animals,
Export Policy
per the procedures/ nuclear material etc.
(Schedule-II) of
conditions specified. as notified by the
ITC(HS) 2022.
Such items are Government from
limited in number. time-to-time.
Figure 4: Brief on Export Policy
4
When & Where to Sell
The "When and Where to Sell" strategy is Focus on Shopping Behaviours
essential for E-Commerce. It involves
market research to identify target regions, An approach to regional targeting
population segments, etc. for expansion of involves understanding of a country's
sales. shopping behaviours. Regions with a
strong prosperity towards online shopping
Overall demand split by age, region etc may be identified as high-potential
Cultural preferences of the buyers markets and should be targeted with more
Seasonal trends in the buyer country focus. Some key E-Commerce intensive
regions to consider:
Market Size (US$)
Online Shoppers
Annual E-commerce Spend (Per Capita) (US$)
In Asia-Pacific, Australia, Japan, and China Asia-Pacific
are the largest E-Commerce markets.
$2400 Bn 2.7 Bn $739
Germany, France, UK are the largest
E-Commerce Markets of Europe
Europe
$1319 Bn 540 Mn $2,143.80
Brazil and Mexico represent potential E-Commerce markets
Latin
marked by a rising online shopping trend. Some challenges
America
exist due to limited payment mechanisms for these regions.
$168 Bn 317 Mn $467
Huge market opportunity due to better
USA internet penetration, increasing E-Commerce
shopping trends, streamlined policies.
$1163.4 Bn 218.8 Mn $4233
5
Focus on Indian Diaspora, Festivals, Sales Events
Persons of Indian Origin living abroad are Sellers must also monitor global sales
a key target demographic with demand for events, seasonal sales trends and festivals
products from India. This presents an celebrated in the various regions.
opportunity for Cross-border B2C E-
Commerce sales, for India-centered Besides global sales events, seasonal
products like handicrafts, food products, drivers such as back-to-school shopping,
religious/festive items, Indian apparel or etc., may also be kept in mind and
other items with a strong Indian theme. leveraged suitably.
Exporters should also focus on and target Sellers may also consider offering
specific holidays/ festivals when the discounts and promotions to attract
demand for products is higher., customers from different countries and
regions.
Canada: 2 M
Russia: 23K
UK: 2 M China: 56K
EU: 2.8M
USA: 4 M
UAE: 3M
Kuwait: 1M
Myanmar: 2 M
Saudi Arabia: 3 M
Sri Lanka: 2 M Malaysia: 3 M
Brazil: 5K Australia: 496K
South Africa: 2 M
Source: Ministry of External Affairs
(Map Not to Scale)
Figure 6: Key Countries with Indian Diaspora
“Exporters must leverage the larger international markets to create consistent
demand throughout the year.”
6
Some Seasonal Sales Trends/ Events
S. No Target Event Event Period Markets
1. New Year’s Day 1st Day of January World Wide
USA, Canada EU, Australia,
2. Boxing Day Sale 26th December
UK, Africa, South America
3. Halloween October 31st USA, Canada, Mexico, South
4. Black Friday Sale 24th November America, Europe
5. Valentines Day February 14th
6. Mother’s Day Second Sunday of May World Wide
7. Father’s Day Third Sunday of June
USA, Canada EU, Australia,
8. Cyber Monday Monday after Thanksgiving
UK, Africa, South America
9. Single’s Day 11th November China, South East Asia, EU
El Buen Fin (The
10. Third Monday of November Mexico and Latin America
Good Weekend)
11. Jour XXL (XXL day) First day of May France
Table1: International sales season trends/events
Focus on Global Festivals for Sales Growth
S. No Target Event Event Period
1. Diwali
October - November
2. Raksha bandhan
3. Thanksgiving Fourth Thursday of November
4. Christmas 25th December
5. Easter March-April
6. Chinese New Year Between January 21 & February 20
7. Ochugen - Japan July - August
8. Holi March - April
9. Ganesh Chaturthi September- November
10. Eid-al-Fitr Currently in April. Varies year-to-year
11. Eid-al-Adha (Bakr-eid) Currently in June. Varies year-to-year
12. Holi March - April
Table 2: Indian & International Festivals
7
How to Sell
Pricing Strategies
It is important to have a clear and dynamic pricing strategy in place before entering any
market. Good pricing strategies help determine sales and profits while staying competitive.
Some key pricing strategies are listed below:
S.No Pricing Strategy Description
Prices are set by adding a certain margin to the total cost of
1. Cost-based goods; easy to calculate and ideal first-step for new E-
Commerce businesses.
Prices of new products are kept high initially to redeem
expenditure around promotion and subsequently prices are
2. Price Skimming
lowered in line with the emerging competition. Ideal for new
innovative products or when entering an untapped market.
Prices are kept low in order to find a foot-hold in a highly-
3. Penetration-based competitive market and gain customer base; Using early
discounts is a common penetration-based pricing strategy.
Pricing is based on competitor pricing/ overall market pricing
Market Oriented/
4. to stay in-sync with the demand. Ideal for heavily competitive
Competitor-based
markets and generic products.
Prices are displayed to make it more appealing to the
customer. Common example is pricing an item at a decimal-
5. Charm pricing
value, i.e., $9.99 instead of $10. Another example is slashing
the original price and placing the discounted price next to it.
An item is priced in comparison to its initial price point or
another similar item. Some examples are: a) Discounting an
item after initially setting it at higher rate b) Pricing a slightly
6. Anchor pricing
more upscale product significantly higher than the earlier
version, directs customer attention towards the upscaled
product.
Table 3: Pricing Strategies
8
How to Find Marketplace Online
How to Design Catalogue For Your Products
An online catalogue works like a shop covered in the product description should
window for an online E-Commerce be provided.
product. Whether someone sells on their
own website or through an online On payment of certain fees, one may also
marketplace, it is vital to organise the consult the E-Commerce Platform
catalogue to match the brand and provider directly for support on listing
product. A visually appealing catalogue and cataloguing services.
helps draw attention of the buyer to build
a strong customer base. Some key points Sellers can also employ online resources
to note when designing a catalogue are: that provide cataloguing services free of
cost. Various free templates available on
Simple and concise product descriptions t h e i n t e r n et may also be explored for
The product descriptions should be catalogue designing.
informative and include all important
features. A good product description A straight forward way is capture some
should be SEO friendly, i.e., include visually appealing photos of your product,
keywords that help search engines then search for one of these websites
rank them. online and follow the given steps
Sharp and clear product images Step 1: Sign up and register yourself on
As customers do not have the option the catalogue website.
to physically interact with the
product, sharp, clear images are Step 2: Enter the product information:
essential for enhancing its appeal. Product Name: Enter a descriptive name
Features like 360-degree product for your product.
views can further improve the Category: Choose the appropriate
showcasing experience. category or create a new one.
Description: Write a detailed product
Functional and visually pleasing layouts description.
An effective seller page should offer Price: Set the selling price.
minimal navigation and serialised Upload high-quality images of your
product listings. For example, product
grouping similar products, as
customers tend to purchase Step 3: Once all product details are
complementary items. entered and confirmed save and download
the catalogue for use on various sites or
FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions) for social E-Commerce.
Whether in chat-based or pre-
documented formats, covering aspects
of the product that have not been
.
9
Packaging Your Products
Exporters must strongly focus on the ‘unboxing experience’
besides the mandatory packaging requirements
Various Packaging services are offered by d) The parcel should be protected against
E-Commerce service providers and major changes in climate, temperature,
Courier service providers. However, atmospheric pressure or conveyance.
Exporters must ensure the following when e) It must be packed in a way as not to
packaging goods before shipment: endanger the health of officials and to
a) Every parcel must be packed & closed avoid any mishap/ injury to officials called
in a manner with due regard to: upon to handle it or to soil/damage other
(i) the weight & nature of the contents; parcels or postal equipment.
(ii) mode of transport and the length of f) Packing or the wrapping should have
... the journey; sufficient space for the entry of service
b) The packing and closing must protect instructions and for affixing stamps and
the contents so that these cannot be labels.
damaged in repeated handling. g) Items such as precious metals, glass,
c) Packaging must be such that it is not fragile objects, liquids, ointments, resin
possible to tamper with the contents etc. must follow special packing
without leaving a trace of violation. conditions.
Key Documentation Requirements
The documentation required for GSTIN: For exporting from India an
undertaking E-Commerce Exports from exporter is required to obtain a GST
India can be broadly divided into two number. Refer to
categories - General documents required https://services.gst.gov.in for details.
for exporting from India and specific
product-based requirements. General IEC(Importer-Exporter Code): The
Documentation requirements are as process of IEC issuance is fully online
follows: and automated. IEC a key business
PAN: It is necessary to a establish a identification number as no Exports
firm of some nature (proprietorship, or Imports may be effected without
partnership, LLP, Limited company, mentioning IEC. For availing an IEC,
Trust, Society etc) and to obtain a logon to the DGFT website
PAN for the same firm. (https://dgft.gov.in)
Bank Account & AD Code: An Indian The product-specific permissions and
bank account in the name of the firm documentary requirements may vary for
is required. The authorised dealer different products. Suitable research &
(AD) code of the concerned bank due diligence may be undertaken before
branch may be noted. exporting.
10
Choosing the Right Logistics For Your Needs
To provide a competitive price to the Cross-border E-Commerce logistics
consumer and in order to reach the involve given business operations as well
consumer time, an optimised and efficient as border crossing procedures. A fast and
logistics plan is a must. While traditional reliable delivery and customs clearance in
domestic E-Commerce business logistics India and at the destination coutry is key
involves following 3 aspects- factor in exports through E-Commerce.
collection and storage of goods
picking and sending orders There are four main types of cross-border
processing returns or rejects E-Commerce logistics providers:
E-Commerce
Affiliate
fulfilment models
4PL Logistics International Logistics Managing Inventory
Providers Service Providers through Warehousing
Services
Multiple Courier Doorstep Pickup and
Integrated Pickup &
Postal Service options to choose Delivery
Delivery Services
Shipping services in Doorstep Pickup & Special Packages
Returns covered
collaboration with the Delivery available for high-
Exporter bears risk of
International Postal Shipping services frequency shipping
unsold inventory
Union Returns covered Returns covered
Figure 7: Types of Logistic Services and their features
11
Exports through the Postal Route
Exports through Postal route are shipped India Post currently offers the following
through Foreign Post Offices and Dak range of services for exports through
Niryat Kendra across the country. postal route:
International International
International Speed International Air
Service Offered Reg Small Tracked Packet
Post (EMS) Parcels
Packet (ITPS)
Online Track &
Trace but
Tracking Online Track & Online Track & Online Track &
limited tracking
System Trace facility Trace facility Trace facility
in some
countries
General maximum
General maximum
weight limit is 35
weight limit is 20
Kgs or the
Kgs or the maximum General
maximum Upto 2 Kgs
Weight acceptable weight maximum
acceptable weight (Suitable for
Restrictions limit prescribed by weight limit is 2
limit prescribed by light weight)
the destination Kgs
the destination
country, whichever is
country, whichever
lower.
is lower.
Countries
100+ 200+ 200+ 40+
covered
Up to 40 SDR
Upto 30 SDR (approx 4000 INR)
Upto 130 SDR Upto 1000/-
(approx 3000/- per parcel plus 4.50
(approx 13000/- INR or the
INR) or the SDR (approx 450
Compensation INR) or the value of value of
value of content, INR) per kg or the
content, whichever is contents, which
whichever is less, value of contents,
less, plus postage ever is less
plus postage whichever is less,
plus postage
Discount of up
Discount of up to
Discounts to 10% based
15% based on
available on monthly
monthly postage
postage
Table 4: Details on Postal Exports
12
To Ship via India Post
1....An exporter has to register with the 5....Exporter has to induct the shipment at
Department of Posts with IEC, GSTIN the nearest Dak Niryat Kendra or
and AD Code of the their merchant bank. International Business Center.
2....Choose the appropriate Postal Bill of 6....Customs will assess and clear the
Export (PBE) form: shipment online and will also raise any
query online, if required. Exporter will
PBE III for E-Commerce Exports then have to respond online and upload
PBE IV for Exports other than E- relevant required documents, in lieu of
Commerce any Customs query.
3....Exporter has to fill the Postal Bill of 7....After Customs Clearance, Exporter
Export online with correct and complete will be able to download “Let Export
data and has to upload invoice and other Order” online from their account.
relevant documents.
4....System will generate online Note: For all Postal related Orders/
harmonized label with the barcode, which Circulars/ Notifications please visit the
exporter has to attach on the article. Department of Posts website regularly.
Exports through the Courier Route
Courier Shipping Bill (CSB) is the main check eligibility for potential benefits
document in the export process via courier under the Government of India schemes.
services wich is to be filed on the Express
Cargo Clearance System(ECCS) website. 4. Prepare shipment details, including
1....Choose the appropriate Courier product description, quantity, value, and
Shipping bill form: r e c i p i e n t ' s i n f o r m a t i o n . .
CSB-4 : for exports under INR 50,000
for Samples/Non-Commercial Value 5....Contact an authorised courier service
CSB-5 : for exports under INR provider (as notified on the ECCS
10,00,000 (Commercial Shipments) platform) and provide them with shipment
details including product info, GST, IEC,
2. Gather necessary documents: GST HSN code, and AD code.
details, IEC, AD code and HSN code of
the product. 6....Provide shipment details for GST
compliance.
3. Create a detailed invoice with itemized
pricing and relevant information. may also 7. Ensure all information and documents
13
are in order before the courier provider Note: For all the latest Custom related
ships your goods. updates please refer to the notifications and
circulars, published on the customs website:
www.cbic.gov.in
Filing of IGST Refunds under Courier/ Postal Exports
Exporters are also eligible for refund of It may be noted that the filing of the
any IGST paid on their E-Commerce shipping bill and claim for IGST Refund
Exports. Basic Steps for claiming refund depends on the mode of shipment:
are as follows - For exports through India Post,
exporter can download “Let Export
(i) Copy of Shipping Bill: Order” online from the Dak Niryat
Ensure that all the required information, Kendra portal.
such as invoice number, port code etc, are For courier exports, the Authorized
accurately filled out in the shipping bill Courier will be responsible for filing
document. the shipping bill.
(ii) GSTR-1 Form: As Courier Shipping Bills are transmitted
All registered users need to file the GSTR- by ECCS to ICEGATE, the IGST Refund
1 form on the GST portal. Within the for Courier Exports may be electronically
GSTR-1 form, locate and select "Table- linked with the Courier SBs. For Export
6A." This is the section where you need to through Postal Route, the IGST refund
provide details related to your export request is required to be uploaded by the
consignment. Customs officer using the ICANN
software.
(iii) Information required in the Table-6A
typically includes: Note: Always refer to the GST portal and
Invoice number for the exported goods, relevant authorities for up-to-date
port, shipping bill details etc. information on filing for IGST refunds.
Handling Returns & Rejections
The authorised courier has to file the The return E-Commerce transaction
Courier Bill of Entry for re-import for for the item is initiated by the same
the same Importer-Exporter Code consignee to whom the item was
(IEC) holder and at the same exported under the corresponding
international courier terminal, for Courier Shipping Bill (CSB-V) and on
whom and where the corresponding the same E-Commerce platform
Courier Shipping Bill (CSB) for the provided a courier agent. Logistics
item was filed. provider in the buyer’s country may
.
14
also initiate the return transaction if provisions have been introduced to
the product could not be cleared from support easy return for E-Commerce
Customs for Import into the buyer’s exporters.
country.
The newly introduced provisions
The image of the return confirmation under the following regulations are
page on the E-Commerce platform is specific for courier re-import of
uploaded on Express Cargo Clearance jewellery subject to certain conditions.
System (ECCS) while filing Courier However, the Regulations do not
Bill of Entry for such re-import. provide for specific exemption of
import duty on re-imports.
The reason of re-import is provided in
the Courier Bill of Entry and the Exemption on import duty for re-
returned item is re-imported along import is governed by Customs
with the original packing; Notification 45/2017 dated 30.06.2017.
As per Courier Imports and Exports
(Electronic Declaration & Processing)
Amendment Regulations, 2022 new
.
Onboarding E-Commerce Platforms
To generate Export demand, one must E-Commerce platforms is a multi-step
present their goods on Global E- process. Some of the cost involved in the
Commerce plaforms. Onboarding on such said process is presented as follows -
.
S. No Type of fees Details
Fee charged as a percentage of the sales
1 Referral fees
made by selling any product
Fee charged in addition to Referral Fee,
2 Closing fees
based on your product price
Fee incurred for delivering your
3 Shipping fees
order through any channel
Fee for availment of
4 Fee to pick, pack, deliver & store your orders
platform’s logistic services
Fee incurred for availing the cataloguing
5 Cataloguing Fee
services of E-Commerce Platform
Table 5: Various Fee Incurred on E-Commerce Platforms
15
Exporting through Social E-Commerce
Exporters should also leverage Social Step 2- Get Approved: Comply with
Media for promoting their products and policies for trustworthiness. Verifying
services. For example: selling through sites your domain, enhances authenticity and
like Facebook marketplace, WhatsApp reach.
business, Instagram, Telegram etc. Social Step 3- List/Catalogue: Using Catalogue
E-Commerce helps create awareness, Manager Tool, add images, title, price,
generate leads, build trust, and drive description, & other relevant details of the
conversions for exports through a large product. Categorise products carefully in
social media user base. Some steps to sell order to reach out to the target audience.
through Social E-Commerce as follows: Step 4- Setup a Checkout Account: Set up a
checkout account to enable buyers to
Step 1- Setup a Business Account: Sellers purchase from listings.
must register and set up a business Step 5- Upload Content regularly:
account, complete their Business Profile, Regularly posting quality social media
including contact details on the platform. content is key to building reach and
. visibility.
Selecting the Right Payment Method
The payment settlement while exporting Online payment gateway service
through E-Commerce can be broadly providers.
classified into three categories. International money transfer services
E-Commerce platforms’ integrated through agents.
payments service.
Buyers Sellers
Figure 8: Types of Payment Modes Available to Sellers
16
Payment Terms & Methods of Receiving Payments
When you register on any E-Commerce flat rate or a percentage of the
platform for the purpose of exports, the transfer amount.
platform may charge a certain
commission for processing your items and Transfer Speed: If you need quick
delivering it to the end user. A breakup of transfers, you may have to pay extra
some of the charges are given in Table-5. for express delivery.
Few points to keep in mind when selecting Transfer Limits: Check the allowable
a payment transfer service are: limit and choose the best suited
service.
Exchange Rates: Banks and transfer
services use the mid-market rate to Discounts: Check for deals like free
trade with one another. Different transfers on sign up and discounts for
providers may offer different rates. large transfers by various service
May compare the rate offered to the providers.
standard rate to choose the one with
the smallest difference. Safety: To ensure safe transfers, use
service providers that comply with the
Transfer Fees: Service providers laws and regulations sepcified by RBI
charge transfer fees that can be a fixed and by the buyers’ country.
RBI Guidelines
Period of realization Manner of receipt
It is obligatory on the part of the exporter (i) Please follow the rules in the Foreign
to realise and repatriate the full value of Exchange Management (Manner of
goods to India within 9 months from the Receipt & Payment) Regulations, 2016, as
date of exports. in RBI Master Circulars (as amended
from time to time).
For goods exported to a warehouse
established outside India, the proceeds (ii) Processing of export related receipts
should be realised within 15 months from through Online Payment Gateway Service
the date of shipment of goods. Providers (OPGSPs) is available for export
of goods of value not exceeding $ 10,000.
RBI also allows AD Category – I banks to
extend the payment period from the “Write-off” of unrealized export bills
export date up to 6 months at a time, In case an exporter is not able to realise
regardless of the invoice value, as long as the outstanding export dues, the exporter
certain conditions are met. .
17
may either self-write off or approach the Opening/ Hiring Warehouses Abroad
AD bank concerned, who had handled the As per the RBI Master Circular, AD
relevant shipping alongwith appropriate Category – I Banks may consider the
supporting documentary evidence. applications received from exporters and
grant permission for opening/ hiring
AD bank, on request of the exporter, may warehouses abroad subject to certain
in respect of certain cases, also write-off conditions:
unrealised export bill without any limit, Applicant’s export outstanding does
provided the bank is satisfied with the not exceed 5% of exports made during
documentary evidence produced. the previous financial year.
Applicant has a minimum export
The limits prescribed for write-offs of turnover of USD 100,000/- during the
unrealized export bills are as in Table 6. last financial year.
S. No Particulars Limit Limit (%) in relation to
Self-write-off by an exporter (Other than
1 5% Total export proceeds
the Status Holder Exporter)
realized during the calendar
year preceding the year in
2 Self-write-off by Status Holder Exporter 10%
which the write-off is being
done
3 Write-off by AD Category-1 Bank 10%
Table 6: Write-Offs Limits Prescribed by RBI
Export Data Processing and Monitoring Electronic Bank Realisation Certificate (e-
System (EDPMS) BRC)
EDPMS is an online module for all Indian Banks also generate Electronic Bank
banks to record exporters’ inward trade Realisation Certificate (e-BRC) for
remittances online. As per RBI Master purposes as specified under the Foreign
circular, AD banks should maintain Trade Policy. The e-BRC system is
Export Bills Register, in physical or currently being revamped to provided a
electronic form aligned with EDPMS. The self-certification option for exporters to
bill number should be given to all type of reconcile their export realisations directly.
export transactions on a financial year
basis (i.e., April to March) and same Note: For updated guidelines regarding
should be reported in EDPMS. While realisation of export proceeds and other
Courier Exports are registered under banking/payment related provisions, please
EDPMS, exports through Postal Route refer to RBI’s Master Circular on Export
are not updated in EDPMS as on date. of Goods and Services.
18
GET SET
GET SET
For any Feedback or Assistance on E-Commerce Exports,
Write to:
Email: ecommerce-dgft@gov.in
Website: https://dgft.gov.in
Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Vanijya Bhawan,
16, Akbar Road, New Delhi - 110 001