Directorate General of Foreign Trade
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Government of India
January 2024

Table of Content
1 Preface 1
Introduction:
2 3
Strategic Trade Controls (Export Controls)
India’s Export Control/SCOMET Licensing Procedure
3 9
and Regulatory Framework
Frequently asked questions (FAQs) on various
SCOMET Policies and General Authorisations
A. Repeat Order Policy
4 B. Stock and Sale Policy 22
C. Demo/Display Policy
D. General Licensing for various SCOMET items
E. Post Export Reporting under Various Policies
5 Compliance by the Industry 32
6 Way Forward 36

PREFACE
In the dynamic landscape of global affairs, the formulation and
implementation of robust strategic trade controls are indispensable for
nations seeking to safeguard their security interests, promote non-
proliferation, and foster international stability. As we delve into the
realm of India's Strategic Trade Controls, this booklet serves as a
comprehensive guide to understand the policies and regulatory
framework, and the evolving nature of India's approach to managing
its strategic trade.
India, with its rich geopolitical history and technological
advancements, has strategically positioned itself on the global stage
as a responsible actor committed to ensuring the responsible
export/transfer of sensitive technologies and goods. The nation's
strategic trade controls play a pivotal role in striking a delicate balance
between facilitating legitimate trade, fostering innovation, and
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems.
Within the pages of this booklet, policies related to India's Strategic
Trade Controls i.e the export of sensitive items falling under the
SCOMET (Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, Equipment, and
Technologies) category are simplified. In addition to exploring India's
stringent controls, this booklet sheds light on the nation's forward-
looking approach through liberalized policies, such as General
Authorizations for certain SCOMET items. This booklet will serve as a
valuable resource for policymakers, researchers, and practitioners
alike. Understanding India's Strategic Trade Controls is not merely an
academic exercise but a crucial step toward fostering transparency,
building trust, and collectively addressing the challenges posed by
global trade in sensitive goods and technologies.
Santosh Sarangi
Additional Secretary & DG, DGFT
Directorate General Foreign Trade(DGFT)
Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & Industry
1
I welcome the ‘Handbook on India’s Strategic Trade
Control System’ being released by DGFT with the
inputs of relevant Government of India and Industry
stakeholders, towards enabling a better understanding
of SCOMET and Strategic Trade Control compliance
by the Indian industry and other stakeholders. This
would further strengthen our established non-
proliferation credentials in export/transfer of dual-use
goods and technologies.
Muanpuii Saiawi
Joint Secretary (D&ISA)
Ministry of External Affairs
2
INTRODUCTION:
STRATEGIC TRADE CONTROLS
(EXPORT CONTROLS)
What are Strategic Trade Controls /
Export Controls?
Strategic Trade Controls are laws and
regulations on managing the flow of dual
use goods, services and technologies
across national borders. These laws and
regulations primarily focus on controlling the
export of such items in order to balance the
country’s commercial and security
considerations.
‘Dual Use’ implies the usage of these goods
and technologies in military applications or
its use in Nuclear / Chemical / Biological
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), along
with their Civilian / Industrial applications.
Objectives
The primary objectives of strategic trade
controls / export controls are on preventing
the proliferation of WMD and their delivery
systems, as well as the uncontrolled transfer
of conventional arms / military items.
Various nations including major producers
and / or exporters of dual-use goods and
technologies exercise such controls.
Accordingly, India maintains a harmonized
list on export control of dual-use and military
items, including software and technologies,
having potential civilian / industrial
applications as well as military and WMD
use. It is restricted / permitted under an
export authorization or license (unless
specifically exempted), except for certain
items that are prohibited.
3
India’s Strategic Trade Control System
Legal Framework
India has a robust law-based system on non-proliferation and strategic trade related
matters that has evolved over the last two decades and is based on the elements in its
various national laws; and which prohibits access of WMD and their delivery systems to
non-state actors (in particular for terrorist purposes), and provides for measures and
controls on WMD, their delivery systems and related dual-use goods and technologies.
The relevant legislations include the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act of 2005 [‘WMD Act’], the United Nations
(Security Council) Act of 1947, the Customs Act of 1962, the Foreign Trade
(Development and Regulation) Act of 1992 [‘FTDR Act’], the Arms Act of 1959, the
Atomic Energy Act of 1962, the Chemical Weapons Convention Act of 2000, the
Environment Protection Act of 1986, the Explosives Act 1884, etc.
4
National Commitment to International Conventions and Regimes
India is a signatory to international conventions on disarmament and non-proliferation,
viz. the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention (BWC). The United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540 obliges all
member States to prohibit the access of WMD and their delivery systems to non-state
actors (in particular for terrorist purposes); and prescribes measures and controls on
WMD, their delivery systems and related materials, equipment and technology.
India is a member of the major multilateral export control regimes, viz. the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR) [on missiles, delivery systems and related dual-use
items], Wassenaar Arrangement (WA) [on munitions / military items and Australia Group
on Biological and Chemical items.
In consonance with the relevant control lists, guidelines and provisions of the international
conventions, mechanisms and regimes, India regulates the exports of dual-use items,
nuclear-related items, and military items, including software and technology under the
SCOMET list.
5
What is SCOMET list?
The first control List, described as “Special Materials, Equipment and Technology
(SMET)”, was notified in Export Import Policy in 1995. FTDR Act of 1992 was amended in
2010 to add Chapter IVA related to controls on export of specified goods, services and
technology that includes SCOMET controls, and to align with certain provisions of the
WMD Act.
SCOMET is an acronym for Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, Equipment and
Technologies. Accordingly, the SCOMET list is our National Export Control List of dual
use items, munitions and nuclear related items, including software and technology. The
Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, Equipment and Technologies (SCOMET) list
notified in 2001 was last updated in 2023 (Appendix 3 of Schedule 2 of ITCHS
Classification of Export and Import) and is available on the DGFT website.
6
There are total eight categories of such items. Various categories and licensing
authorities in SCOMET are as under:
SCOMET SCOMET items Licensing
Category Jurisdiction
0 Nuclear materials, nuclear-related other Department of Atomic
materials, equipment and technology Energy (DAE)
1 Toxic chemical agents and other DGFT
chemicals
2 Micro-organisms, Toxins DGFT
3 Materials, Materials Processing Equipment DGFT
and related Technologies
4 Nuclear-related other equipment and DGFT
technology, not controlled under Category
‘0’
5 Aerospace systems, equipment, including DGFT
production and test equipment, and
related technology
6 Munitions List Department of Defence
Production
(DDP), Ministry of
Defence
(DGFT for Category
6A007 and 6A008 )
7 Reserved DGFT
8 Special Materials and Related Equipment, DGFT
Material Processing, Electronics,
Computers, Telecommunications,
Information Security, Sensors and Lasers,
Navigation and Avionics, Marine,
Aerospace and Propulsion
7
Key Components of SCOMET list
1. Special Chemicals
This category includes chemicals that have applications
in various industries but also possess properties that
can be used for chemical weapons or military
purposes. Examples may include chemicals used in the
production of pharmaceuticals or agriculture, yet with
the potential for use in the development of chemical
weapons.
2. Organisms
Biological agents and organisms fall under this
category. It encompasses living entities that may have
applications in medical, agricultural, or industrial fields
but may also pose a threat in the context of biological
weapons or bioterrorism.
3. Materials
Materials that can be utilized in both civilian and military
applications are covered under SCOMET. This may
include metals, alloys, composites and special
materials that have properties suitable for dual-use
purposes.
4. Equipment
Various types of equipment that could have
applications in strategic fields. This may encompass
machinery, devices, or systems with potential dual-use
capabilities.
5. Technologies
The technological aspect of SCOMET involves
knowledge and information that can be applied in
diverse sectors. Technologies with applications in
research, development, and manufacturing, but with
the potential for military and WMD use, are included.
The SCOMET list is maintained under India's Foreign
Trade Policy which is implemented by the Directorate
General of Foreign Trade (DGFT). Chapter 10 of the
Foreign Trade Policy 2023 specifies the SCOMET
policies and Chapter 10 of the Handbook of Procedures
specifies the SCOMET licensing procedures.
8
INDIA’S EXPORT CONTROL / SCOMET LICENSING PROCEDURE
AND RELATED REGULATIONS
As per the SCOMET regulations, an export license will be required for exporting any
SCOMET-listed item including technology. Export of SCOMET items is either prohibited
for export (certain items), or restricted (thus requiring prior export authorisation), or
exempted from such authorisation (subject to the issuance of a general authorisation) for
export of specified items to certain destinations with certain post-reporting, recordkeeping
requirements, etc. India’s SCOMET List is harmonized with the control lists prescribed
under the WA, AG and MTCR regimes, as well as that of the NSG and CWC.
As per our national laws and regulations, exports of items listed in the SCOMET are
subject to export licensing. The licensing is also applicable for the technology related to
items specified under the SCOMET list and it is also controlled and requires authorisation
from the licensing authority. Accordingly, Intangible Technology Transfers (ITT) related to
SCOMET items are also controlled.
Technology means information (including information embodied in software) other than
information in the public domain, that is capable of being used: in the development,
production or use of any goods or software; in the development of, or the carrying out of,
an industrial or commercial activity or the provision of a service of any kind in relation to
an item specified under India’s SCOMET list. This information may take the form of
technical data (blueprints, plans, diagrams, models, formulae, algorithms, tables,
engineering designs and specifications, manuals, instructions, etc., written or recorded on
other media or devices) or technical assistance (instruction, skills, training, working
knowledge, consulting services).
Companies and other organizations dealing with dual-use items are mandated to comply
with export control regulations. Effective control of exports to prevent the proliferation of
dual-use items is possible only if all the stakeholders, including manufacturers of dual-use
items, exporters and other organisations/stakeholders with the technical expertise or
knowledge on these items, recognise the need for such controls and support their
compliance with all the resources available to them. A trust-based partnership between
Industry, other organisations/stakeholders and the Government is vital to achieving this
shared objective of non-proliferation of dual-use items. An industry or organization’s
expertise, including the knowledge of the technical characteristics and end use of the
items and knowledge of the end-users outside India, plays a key role in the
implementation of export controls.
9
The following items, among others, indicate the dual use of the items covered under the
SCOMET list.
Category Products Civil / Industrial Use Military / WMD Use
Cosmetics and Personal
Ammunition Manufacturing,
Triethanolamine Care Products,
Chemical Weapons
Pharmaceuticals
Category 1
Chemical Manufacturing,
Sodium Sulphide Paper and Pulp Chemical Warfare Agents
Industry
Clostridium
Category 2 Probiotic, Biotechnology Biological warfare
butyricum
Surveillance
Aerial
and Reconnaissance,
Photography and
UAVs, Target Acquisition, Strike
Category 5 Videography, Search and
Drones Operations, Electronic
Rescue, Infrastructure
Warfare, Mine Detection
Inspection
and Clearance
Demolition
TNT, Demolition
and Breaching, Landmines,
Category 6 Explosives, HMX, and Construction,
Controlled Explosive
Propellants Mining, Pyrotechnics
Devices, Blast Mitigation
Telecommunication Telephony,
Command
systems and Television and
and Control, Secure
equipment/Encrypti Broadcasting, Satellite
Communication, Secure
on Software Communications, Energy
Military Networks,
/Information and Utility
Interoperability
Security Monitoring
Missiles and Guided
Consumer, Electronics,
Munitions, Communications
Category 8 Integrated circuits Smart Home Technology,
and Encryption, Military
Industrial Automation
Electronics
Laser Surgery and
Medical Devices, Barcode Laser Targeting and Range
Lasers, Scanners and Optical finding, Night Vision and
components and Readers, Targeting, Laser Weapons,
optical equipment Entertainment and Laser Laser
Shows, Astronomy and Range Designators
Space Observation.
10
Scope of SCOMET list and related Controls
Items Subject to Control: Both new and used goods are subject to SCOMET
controls
Co-mingling/integration: The SCOMET list specifies that non-controlled goods
containing one or more controlled components when the controlled component or
components are the principal element of the goods and can feasibly be removed or
used for other purposes) are still subject to Indian export controls
Applicable for Goods, Software and Technology: If items are prima facie,
classifiable under two or more headings, the heading that provides the most specific
description shall be preferred to the heading providing a more general description.
The end-use of the item would be a relevant criteria in determining the classification.
Catch-All Provision: Specified in Para 10.05 of the FTP 2023, the Catch-All
provision specifies that the export of items not in the SCOMET List may also be
regulated under provisions of the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act,2005. If the exporter has been notified
in writing by DGFT or he knows or has reason to believe that an item not covered in
the SCOMET list has a potential risk of use in or diversion to weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) or in their missile system or military end use (including by
terrorists and non-state actors), the export of such an item may be denied or
permitted subject to the grant of a license, as per the procedure provided for
SCOMET items in Para 10.05 and 10.06 of HBP.
These controls apply to:
The whole of India including its
Exclusive Economic Zone
Citizens of India outside India;
companies or bodies corporate,
registered or incorporated in India or
having their associates, branches or
subsidiaries, outside India
Any ship, aircraft or other means of
transport registered in India or
outside India, wherever it may be
Foreigners while in India; and
persons in the service of the
Government of India, within and
beyond India
11
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Sanctions
India implements the UNSC sanctions on non-proliferation as well as the UNSC arms
embargo through the United Nations (Security Council) Act of 1947, WMD Act and other
relevant Government of India Acts. Hence, the Indian companies and organisations
involved in strategic trade of goods and technologies must be aware and take suitable
internal compliance measures related to: the countries/jurisdictions under the UNSC
sanctions on non-proliferation and UNSC arms embargo; trade, finance and other
prohibitions/restrictions under the respective sanctions regimes; the consolidated
sanctioned list of individuals and entities, etc.
The UNSC consolidated list of sanctioned individuals and entities and the various UNSC
sanctions regimes are available at:
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/un-sc-consolidated-list
SCOMET Dual Use Licensing Process
Inter Ministerial Working Group (IMWG)
An Inter-Ministerial Working Group (IMWG) in DGFT (Hqrs.) comprising representatives
of other Ministries / Departments / Organizations of the Government of India, as
considered appropriate, shall consider applications for export of SCOMET items as
specified in Appendix-3 to Schedule 2 of ITC (HS) Classifications of Export and Import
Items based on the following guidelines / factors:
I. Applications for Authorisation to export items or technology or software on SCOMET
List are considered on the basis of following general criteria:
(a) Credential of end-user, credibility of declaration of end-use of the item or
technology, integrity of chain of transmission of item from supplier to end-user, and
on potential of the item or technology, including timing of its export, to contribute to
end-uses that are not in conformity with India’s national security or foreign policy
goals and objectives, goals and objectives of global non-proliferation, or India’s
obligations under International Treaties/Agreements/Conventions to which it is a
State party.
(b) Assessed risk that exported items will fall into hands of terrorists, terrorist groups,
and non-State actors;
(c) Export control measures instituted by the recipient State;
12
(d) Capabilities and objectives of programs of the recipient State relating to weapons
and their delivery;
(e) Assessment of end-use(s) of item(s);
(f) Applicability of provisions of relevant bilateral or multilateral Agreements and
Arrangements, to which India is a party, or adherent. This is including but not limited
to the control lists of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, Missile Technology Control
Regime, Australia Group (and its Warning List or Awareness Raising Guidelines)
and Wassenaar Arrangement (and its Sensitive List and Very Sensitive List) as
amended from time to time;
II. Timeline for comments/NOC by IMWG members: The members of IMWG will
endeavour to furnish their written comments/views/no objection to DGFT within 30 days
from the date of forwarding of online application by DGFT (Hqrs.). If no
comments/views/no objection is received within the stipulated period, the cases will be
placed before IMWG for taking a decision as deemed appropriate.
III. The IMWG shall normally meet once every month. Where a case has been deferred in
the IMWG meeting and subsequently comments/views/NOC(s) are received from all
concerned agencies with no divergence in views, authorisation shall be issued with the
approval of Chairman, IMWG and the case shall be brought before IMWG in its
subsequent meeting for approval on ex-post facto basis.
Documentation requirements for different categories of Dual Use
Exports under SCOMET
Type of Export under SCOMET Policy Provision/ Documentary
Requirements
No export authorisation is required for
1.Supply of SCOMET Items from DTA supply of SCOMET items from DTA to
to SEZ/EOU and outside the Country SEZ/EoU.
(Refer to Page 2 of SCOMET List An annual report of such supplies from
notified in Annexure 2 to Appendix-3 to DTA to SEZ/EoU shall be reported to
Schedule 2 of ITC (HS) Classifications SCOMET Section, DGFT (Hqrs) by the
of Export and Import Items) Development Commissioner (DC) of
respective SEZ/EoU.
13
2. Export of SCOMET Items from SEZ / Export authorization is required if
EOU to outside the country the SCOMET items are to be
physically exported outside the
country from SEZ / EOU i.e. to
another country (Refer Rule 26 of
the SEZ Rules, 2006).
3. Fresh Export of SCOMET Item Identify the category/subcategory
(Under Category 1-5 & 8) under which your item falls
Application in the prescribed
(Exporting an SCOMET item for the first proforma (ANF 10A- 10E) as
time) applicable
End user certificate (to be filled by
(Direct export to ultimate end user) all entities in the supply chain on
their letter head duly signed and
stamped with all details filled)
End user certificate to be filled in
prescribed proforma
(Appendix 10j(i), 10j(ii) and 10j(iii)
as applicable.
Purchase Order copies(in
appropriate readable form)
Technical Specification of the item
Supply chain diagram
4. Export for repeat orders of same Application in the prescribed
SCOMET items proforma(ANF 10A)
Repeat Order Certificate in the
(Repeat export of items of same technical prescribed proformab[Appendix
specifications which have earlier been 10B(i)
allowed for export to the same countries A declaration by the authorized
/entities after due verification process) signatory of the exporter firm on
the qualifying conditions as per (i)
(Repeat order Policy excludes Repeat to (iv) above shall be submitted on
under Category 3A401 and software and prescribed proforma [Appendix
technology under any category) 10B(ii)]
Para 10.09 of HBP 2023
14
Same country/entities would imply
that (a) the foreign buyer (b) the
consignee or the intermediaries, if
any (c) the end user and (d) the
end use are exactly the same for
which export authorisation has
been issued to the applicant
exporter earlier after due
consultation/verification.
Copy of Original SCOMET
Authorization
Purchase Order Copy
End user Certificate in the
Prescribed format Appendix 10j(i),
10j(ii), 10j(iii) as applicable
Technical Specification of the item
5. Export for Stock and Sale purpose Application in prescribed proforma
Bulk export of SCOMET items (ANF-10B)
(excluding Category 0, Category Documentary proof regarding
3A4001, Category 6 and transfer of corporate relationship between the
technology under any category) Indian exporter and stockist
End-use/End-user Certificate from
(Export of items initially to the stockist stockist entity abroad in
abroad and then from the stockist to the Appendix10J(iii)
ultimate end users in the same country or List of countries (in the EUC) to
approved countries) which the items imported from
India would be exported by the
Para 10.10 of HBP 2023 stockist;
6. Export of spare parts under In addition to requirements specified in
SCOMET under Stock and Sale 5 above, the applicant needs to
indicate the requirement of spare
(Export of spare parts along with main parts after judicious and reasonable
item/ equipment under stock and sale) assessment with justification thereof
15
Application in proforma ANF 10E
7. Procedure/ Guidelines for filing /
EUC as per proforma Appendix 10L
Evaluation of Applications for
Profile of the foreign national
Entering into an Arrangement or
Passport Copy
Understanding for Site Visits, On-
Details of the entire arrangement
site Verification and Access to
Records /Documentation
Kindly refer to appendix 10A and
para 10.08 of HBP 2023
8. Export for repair/replacement of (i) Re-export for Repair/replacement of
defective SCOMET items imported item(s) abroad and return back to
India
Legal Undertaking on the stamp paper
Kindly refer to Appendix 10D, 10E, of Rs. 200/-in prescribed proforma
10F and para 10.12 of HBP 2023 (Appendix 10K).
Proof of import of the item(s)
Proof of obligation for replacement or
repair of defective/damaged items.
Contract agreement with the
supplier/OEM(including agency
authorized by OEM)
Purchase order containing terms of
import
Warranty policy/conditions on
replacement/repair of
defective/damaged items;
(ii) repair/replacement of indigenous
SCOMET items
Copy of the SCOMET License issued
for the export of the items to be
replaced/repaired;
Shipping bills
Bill of Entry
Contract agreement of the Indian
exporter/OEM with the foreign buyer
Legal Undertaking
16
(iii) Return of items imported for repair
at a repair facility in India
Proof of import of the item(s)-
BOEs, Export License, etc.
Contract agreement and/or
‘Statement of Work (SOW)’/ Master
Service agreement(MSA) between
Indian exporter and entities of
repair facility (if different from
exporter)with the entity abroad
/OEM(including agency authorized
by OEM) defining conditions for
undertaking repair in India.
An Undertaking from the applicant
exporter (on the letter head of the
firm duly signed and stamped by
the authorized signatory) fulfilling
the clauses as mentioned in
Appendix 10F.
9. Temporary export of SCOMET items Proof of event
(Demo/Display/Exhibition/Tenders/
(Export authorization for RFP/RFQ/NIT)
demo/display/exhibition/tenders/ Proof of participation
RFP/RFQ/NIT abroad or for return abroad Legal Undertaking from the
after demo/ display/ exhibition/ tenders/ applicant firm on the stamp paper
RFP/ RFQ/ NIT etc. in India) of Rs. 200/-, in prescribed proforma
Kindly refer to Para 10.13 of HBP 2023 (Appendix 10K).
10. Export of imported items to the Proof of import of the item(s)-
same foreign entity or to its OEM on BOEs, Export License, etc.
the obsolescence of technology, dead Proof of obsolescence/cancellation
on arrival, cancellation of order, of order for intended items
calibration, testing, etc. Proof of obligation for re-
export/return for intended item-
(Kindly refer to Appendix I & Para 10.14 of Contract agreement
HBP 2023) An Undertaking on the letter head
of the firm duly signed and
stamped
17
Validity of SCOMET Authorizations
S.No Authorization Type Validity
1 Fresh Export 2 years
General Authorization for Intra Company
2 3 years
Transfer (GAICT)
General Authorization for Export of Chemicals
3 5 years
(GAEC)
General Authorization for Export of Drones
4 3 years
(GAED)
General Authorization for Export after Repairs in
5 1 years
India (GAER)
Licensing process for export of SCOMET Category 0 items -
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
1. Submission of Form A prescribed in The Atomic Energy (Working of the Mines,
Minerals, and Handling of Prescribed Substances) Rules, 1984, along with other
specified documents needed for processing the application
2. Authorisations for export of certain items in Category ‘0’ will not be granted unless
transfer is additionally under adequate physical protection and is covered by
appropriate International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards, or any other
mutually agreed controls on transferred items
3. The applications are examined based on various criteria that includes:
Credential of end-user • Credibility of declaration of end-use of the item or
technology • Integrity of the chain of transmission of item from supplier to end-
user
18
Defence Exports Licensing Process for Munitions List ( SCOMET
Category 6 items) - Department of Defence Production
The export of items specified in Category 6 (Munitions List) except those covered under
Notes 2 & 3 of Commodity Identification Note (CIN) of the SCOMET is governed by the
Standard Operating Procedure issued by the Department of Defence Production (DDP),
Ministry of Defence. The Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) vide Public Notice
No. 4/2015-20 dated 24th April, 2017 has delegated its authority and notified Department
of Defence Production(DDP) as the Licensing Authority for export items in Category 6 of
SCOMET.
The Procedure for Licensing is divided into 7 parts as per the SOP issued by the
Department of Defence Production ( SOP available at www.ddpmod.gov.in)
A. Export of ML Items as per Appendix II (Major platforms and equipment)
B. Export of ML Items other than as per Appendix II
C. Export of ML Items for Exhibition purpose
D. Export of ML Items for testing and evaluation
E. In-principal approval for ML items for participation in Tender/RPF/NIT or exploring
export opportunity
F. Approval for transfer of technology/software for design, development, manufacturing,
etc. of ML items under Category 6 of SCOMET
G. Re-export of an item
The exporters are required to submit their online applications to DDP attaching a copy of
EUC, Purchase Order, Technical Specification of the items, undertaking in requisite
format etc. Consultation is done with the relevant stakeholders as per the process laid out
for different parts/categories of exports in the SOP.
The secretary (DP) is the competent authority for major platform and equipment items
covered under Appendix – II. The competent authority for the rest of the items mentioned
above is JS (DIP).
DDP has also notified the Open General Export License (OGEL) - one-time export
license, which permits the industry to export specified items to specified destinations,
enumerated in the OGEL, without seeking export authorization during the validity of the
OGEL. OGEL has been integrated with end to end online Portal.
19
Violation of SCOMET Policy
Infringements of export control regulations carry legal consequences, such as penalty,,
suspension/cancellation of importer exporter code under the FTP / FTDR Act or
imprisonment under the WMD Act, Customs Act of 1962, etc.
Penal action under Section 11(2) of Chapter IV under the
FTDR Act including cancellation of IEC
Section 14(E) & 8(c) of the FTDR Act
Fiscal Penalty upto 5 times the in value of goods in terms of
Section 11(2) of the FTDR Act
Other criminal actions as per provisions of WMD Act, and
Section 14(3) of FTDR Act including Imprisonment.
20
Elements of Standard Licensing Process - Step by step guide to file
SCOMET Application- Regulations -> ANFs and Appendices on the website
of DGFT
Registration The exporter has to register
themselves on the DGFT
website
Identifying The exporter needs to identify SCOMET List needs to be
the SCOMET whether his products falls under referred for the same.
item SCOMET or not.
Identifying The exporter has to refer to the Subsequent to identifying the
the SCOMET SCOMET List and classify the category and sub category, the
Category and category and sub category exporter may refer to the policy
Sub category under which the intended item options available for export
for exports falls under the specific category (as
applicable).
Filing An online application has to be Services
Application filed by the applicant in the –> Export Management System
prescribed Performa on the –> SCOMET on the website of
DGFT’s online portal DGFT
Identifying The applicant needs to identify For the documents applicable for
Broad Sub the nature of its intended specific category of exports
category of exports (Fresh, Repeat, Demo, under SCOMET Appendix (10 -
Intended Repair and Return, General 10M) and ANF (10A- 10F) may
Exports Authorizations) and submit the be referred.
required documents in
prescribed proforma. These Appendices provide
detailed information on the
documentation requirement.
21
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS (FAQs) on VARIOUS
SCOMET POLICIES AND GENERAL AUTHORISATIONS
A. Repeat Order Policy
1. What is a Repeat Order Policy?
This policy provision enables an exporter to export the same SCOMET items(same
intended end use, same sub-category, same specifications) to the same
country/entities(buyer/consignee/end-user) for which authorization has already been
granted to the exporter within a valid timeline by DGFT.
2. What if I want to export the same item to a different country/entity?
Such cases would not be considered under “Repeat”. Export of the same item to a
different country/end-user would require the applicant to file for a new application under
the category “Fresh Exports”. IMWG evaluates the application and decided on it after
verifying the credentials of the foreign buyer, consignee, and end-user.
3. What are the documents to be submitted while filing for a Repeat Order?
(i) Repeat Order Certificate from the end user in the prescribed format (Appendix 10B(i)
declaring his Annual Operational Capacity.
(ii) Declaration by the Exporter fulfilling the clauses (i) to (iv) of Para 10.09 of HBP 2023 in
the prescribed format Appendix 10B(ii)
(iii) End user certificate from all the entities involved in the Supply Chain(buyer,
consignee/end-user) in the prescribed format Appendix 10j(i), 10j(ii), 10j(iii) as applicable.
(iv) Purchase Order in a clear readable format
(v) Technical Specifications/Technical Diagrams of the intended item of Export.
4. What is an Annual Operational Capacity(AOC)?
The Annual Operational Capacity is the amount of the end product a generating plant
would have produced if the plant had been running at full capacity during that year. As far
as declaring the AOC in Appendix 10B(i) is concerned, the end user needs to declare the
maximum amount of the current SCOMET item required by him during a year to produce
the end product if it were operating at full capacity. (For eg: AOC for FY 22-23 would
mean: 100 kgs of a particular SCOMET item(say, Sodium Sulphide) is essential for
production during the financial year 2022-23.
5. Is there any limit to the number of repeat authorizations that could be applied
for?
No, there is no limit to the number of repeat authorizations that could be taken by the
exporter. However, it should be applied within 3 years of the validity of approval of the
Original SCOMET Authorization (Eg. A SCOMET Authorization issued on 01.01.2024 is
valid for multiple repeats until 01.01.2027)
22
B. Stock and Sale Policy
1. What does the 'Stock and Sale' policy refer to in SCOMET item exports?
The 'Stock and Sale' policy allows Indian exporters to send SCOMET items to an entity
abroad (stockist) for subsequent transfer to ultimate end users.
2. Who qualifies as a 'Stockist' under this policy?
‘Stockist’ refers to the entity abroad to whom the SCOMET items are originally exported
by an Indian principal/wholly owned subsidiary. The Stockist entity should be a
subsidiary/principal company abroad of the Indian exporter;
3. What documents are required for the application to export to a stockist abroad?
(i)Application in the prescribed proforma (ANF-10B)
(ii)Proof of corporate relationship between the Indian exporter and stockist
(iii)End-use/End-user Certificate from stockist entity abroad in Appendix10J(iii)
(iv)List of countries for export where the item would be exported by the stockist
(v)Purchase orders
(vi)Technical specifications
(vii)The stockist's Internal Compliance Program Document (if any)
4. Is there a need for authorizations for transfers within the country of the stockist?
No authorizations are required for transfers within the country of the stockist or for re-
export to end users in approved countries. However, in case of sale/transfer by the
stockist within the same country and for re-export/re-transfer to the end users in
countries, for which, in-principle approval has been granted, post reporting requirement is
to be fulfilled.
5. What does "same country transfers" imply in the policy?
"Same country transfers" refer to transfers within an independent sovereign entity.
Transfers within an economic or customs union do not qualify as "same-country
transfers."
6. Are there specific regulations for re-export to approved countries?
Yes, re-export to approved countries is subject to the export control regulations of the
country where the stockist is located.
7. Do I need to report the transfers made under the authorization? If yes, How?
Yes, the exporter must submit post-reporting details of such transfers to the SCOMET
Division in ANF-10B, including End-use/End-user Certificates and Bill of Entry within 3
months of each transfer.
23
8. Can I apply for repeat orders under this policy?
Yes, Repeat can be applied for the export of the same SCOMET items to the same
stockist entity, and re-export/re-transfer of the same SCOMET items from the stockist
entity to the end users (within the country of the stockist entity and only the countries of
ultimate end use where in-principle approval has been granted).
9. Is there an annual reporting requirement for stock and sale authorizations?
Yes, exporters must submit a statement by January 31st each year, detailing exports,
transfers, and inventory with the stockist as of December 31st of the previous year.
10. What happens if there is a failure to provide annual reports?
Failure to submit annual reports may lead to penalties or the cancellation of the stock and
sale authorization, or relevant action under FTD&R Act.
11. Is there a validity period for transferring items to end users?
Yes, items exported to the stockist under the stock and sale authorization should be
transferred to final end-users within the validity period mentioned in the authorization i.e.
2 years.
C. Demo/Display Policy
1. What is the SCOMET policy to send items abroad only for Demo/Display etc.?
Yes, the policy is simplified for the following type of export/re-export and does not go
through the IMWG evaluation process -
(i) Export of indigenous/imported SCOMET item(s) for demo/display/exhibition/
tenders/RFP/RFQ/NIT purposes abroad ( SCOMET license can be applied
(ii) Export of SCOMET item(s) imported for participation in demo/display/exhibition
/tenders/RFP/RFQ/NIT in India
2. Are there any specific categories under SCOMET that are only allowed under the
Demo/Display policy?
Authorizations for the export of SCOMET items (except those under Category 0, 1, 2 & 6
or ‘Technology’ or ‘Software’ in any category) are eligible for application under
Demo/Display policy.
3. What are the conditions for exporting indigenous/imported SCOMET items for
the mentioned purposes abroad?
(i)The export is temporary and for a specified period.
(ii) No end-user certificate is required.
(iii) No commercial transactions like selling/buying/renting/leasing are allowed.
(iv) No transfer of technology through exchange/disclosure of information.
(v) No authorization for UNSC-sanctioned destinations or high-risk countries/entities.
24
4. What are the documents required for the export of Indigenous goods for
participation in Demo/Display abroad?
(i) Application in proforma - Appendix 10A
(ii) Proof of the event
(iii) Proof of Participation
(iv) Legal Undertaking, in prescribed proforma (Appendix 10K)
5. Are there any other conditions under Demo/Display policy for items once the
demo is over?
Exported items should be brought back to India within 90 days after the event or within
the extended time allowed by DGFT. The licensee must submit a Bill of Entry confirming
the return to DGFT(Hqrs).
6. What are the documents required for the export of imported SCOMET items after
participation in demo/display/exhibition /tenders/RFP/RFQ/NIT in India?
(i) Bill of entry containing details of the items being exported after completion of
Demo/Display
(ii) Export License (if applicable) issued by the foreign country for the original import of
the items to India
(iii) The proof of event/participation like an invitation letter or advertisement detailing the
purpose, schedule, and specific location (venue, city) of the exhibition, display, demo,
tender, RFP, RFQ, or NIT
(iv) An Undertaking from the applicant firm in Appendix 10H.
25
D. General Licensing for Exporting certain SCOMET items
The licensing process of the SCOMET-listed items/technologies has been liberalized for
certain categories of items depending on their end use and sensitivity as well as
destination/end users. Bulk licensing( General Authorisation/OGEL) has been introduced
by the Licensing authorities to streamline the process of SCOMET application filing and
reduce the transaction cost involved in taking the license every time the export is to be
made. General authorization with a validity of 2-3 years ensures business certainty while
also reducing the compliance burden in certain categories of SCOMET items. The
Industry has been taking benefit of the various General Authorizations.
General Authorizations are bulk authorizations focusing
on specific sectors and specific SCOMET Categories to
certain approved destinations without any quantity
restrictions.
Introduced to liberalize the exports of SCOMET items to
help the Indian Industry. The following is covered under
What are General General Authorisations:
Authorizations?
(i) General Authorization for Export of Chemicals and
Related Equipments (GAEC)
(ii) General Authorization for Export of Drones(GAED)
(iii) General Authorization for Export after Repair in
India(GAER)
(iv) General Authorisation for Intra-Company
Transfer(GAICT)
1. Kindly identify the category under which the item
falls.
How do I know whether I
am eligible for obtaining a
2. Post identifying the category, refer to the SCOMET
General Authorization for
List available on the DGFT website and the policy
export of my SCOMET
provision mentioned against the specific categories to
item?
identify whether the exports may be considered under
GAEC Application or a Standard/General SCOMET
Application.
26
General Authorization for export of Chemicals and Related Equipments(GAEC)
Para 10.10 of HBP 2023
What is GAEC? 1. GAEC stands for General Authorization for Export of
Chemicals and Related Equipments and is applicable for certain
SCOMET items. It is a one-time general authorization issued by
DGFT.
2. GAEC covers the following categories of export to certain
specified destinations subject to fulfilling certain conditions as
per para 10.16 of HBP 2023:
SCOMET Category 1C,1D, 1E
SCOMET Category 30001, 3D004
The mixture of Chemicals containing 1% or less of chemicals
1B010, 1B011, 1B012 and 1B040 under SCOMET list.
The mixture of Chemicals containing 30% or less of
chemicals listed under 1 C in the SCOMET List (Kindly refer
to Table 1 of Appendix 10N).
The mixture of Chemicals containing 30% or less of
chemicals listed under 1E in the SCOMET List.
Category 3A306
Kindly refer to Appendix 10N which provides an exhaustive list of
items covered, applicable list of countries applicable, etc.)
What are the (i) If past exports under same category/sub-category are done:
documents required Detailed description of the item along with the technical
for filing application specification/model/part no., etc
under GAEC? Details of past exports/copy of shipping bill as a proof/EUC
copies
Undertaking on the letterhead duly signed and stamped by
authorized signatory fulfilling clauses as mentioned in the
relevant PN
(ii) If past exports under same category/sub-category are not
done:
Detailed description of the item along with the technical
specification/model/part no., etc.
Details of entire supply chain (buyer, consignee and end
user, etc.) of intended exports.
EUC in the letterhead of parties involved in the supply chain
in Appendix 10j(i),10j(ii) (as applicable)
Undertaking on the letterhead duly signed and stamped by
authorized signatory fulfilling clauses as mentioned in the
relevant PN.
27
General Authorization for Export of Drones(GAED)
DGFT Public Notice 19 dated 23.06.2023
GAED stands for General Authorization for Export of Drones which is
What is GAED? a one time license requirement for the export of drones subject to
certain conditions as specified in Public Notice 19 dated 23.06.2023.
It applies to Unmanned Aerial Vehicles including drones, remotely
piloted air vehicles and autonomous programmable vehicles specified
Which type of at 5B(a)(ii) and capable of a range equal to or less than 25 km and
drones does it delivering a payload of not more than 25 kgs (excluding the software
apply to? and technology of these items). The type of Drones/UAVs covered
elsewhere (other than Category 5B(a)(ii)) in the SCOMET list are not
eligible for GAED.
ANF10G
What documents EUC [Appendix 10 J (i)] of all entities involved in supply chain
are required for List of countries where the export is expected to be done under
application under GAED
GAED ? Undertaking of the firm as per Para 10.16(A)II.d
Internal Compliance Programme Document.
Payloads such as model, part number
Payload capacity
What
Altitude
specifications of
Range
the drones/UAVs
Endurance
do I need to
Speed
include in the
Communication type (Encrypted or Unencrypted, GPRS or
description of the
satellite based)
drone?
Accuracy
Other relevant details (as applicable)
General Authorization for Export after Repair in India (GAER)
Para 10.12D of HBP 2023 and Appendix 10F(i)
GAER Stands for one-time General authorization for Export after
What is GAER?
Repair of imported SCOMET items to the same entity abroad after
repair in India.
ANF 10A
Proof of import of the item(s) - BOEs, Export license, etc.
What are the
Proof of obligation for repair of defective/damaged items-
documents
Contract agreement and/or ‘Statement of Work (SOW)’/ Master
required for
Service agreement (MSA)
applying under
An Undertaking from the applicant exporter (on the letter head of
GAER ?
the firm duly signed and stamped by the authorized signatory) as
per para 10.12D of HBP 2023.
28
Global Authorisation for Intra-Company Transfers (GAICT) of SCOMET Items
including /Software/Technology.
Para 10.15 of HBP 2023
What is GAICT? GAICT stands for Global Authorization for Intra-
Company Transfers. GAICT is intended to facilitate
the export and re-export of SCOMET items,
including software and technology, between Indian
parent companies or subsidiaries and foreign
companies or subsidiaries, subject to certain
conditions.
What types of items fall Items, software, and technology falling under
under GAICT? SCOMET Category 8 (except items listed in
Appendix 10M) are eligible for GAICT. These may
include items used in design, encryption, research,
development, and related services.
Which countries are eligible GAICT transfers are generally allowed to countries
for GAICT transfers? listed in Table 1 of Para10.15A (ii.b). However, in
exceptional cases, the Inter-Ministerial Working
Group (IMWG) may consider other countries based
on specific criteria considering description/end
use/end user of the item.
What documents are required ANF10C
for filing application under Certified/approved ICP of the Indian parent
GAICT ? company
Documentary proof of the corporate
relationship between entities involved.
Exporter must submit certified ICP or show
compliance with foreign parent company's ICP,
approved by Compliance Manager or a relevant
Government agency (e.g., AEO scheme).
Undertaking on the letterhead of the firm duly
signed and stamped by the authorised
signatory fulfilling clauses of relevant para of
HBP 2023.
EUC in format APPENDIX- 10J (iv)
29
E. Post Export Reporting under various Policies
What is Post Export Reporting?
Post Export Reporting means to report to
DGFT/IMWG regarding the exports done
under different authorizations granted to the
exporter. Post-export reporting requires the
exporters to include details of the exports
and relevant documentary requirements.
Policy Post-Export Reporting Requirement
Return of item(s) back to India after repair/replacement:
(a)Exported items shall be brought back to India within 90 days
repair is completed or item is replaced or within the extended
time, as allowed by the DGFT;
SCOMET items
exported for repair (b) In case the defective/damaged item(s) cannot be imported
abroad under due to any reason (beyond repair, testing failure analysis etc.),
Repair/return evidence of destruction in the importing country shall be
policy submitted to DGFT within 90 days of export.
(c) Bill of Entry confirming the return back of such SCOMET
item(s) to India shall be intimated by the licensee to the
DGFT(Hqrs) in the prescribed proforma (Annexure-I of Appendix
10K), duly signed in ink and stamped by the authorised signatory.
(a) The Indian exporter shall submit post-shipment details of each
transfer/consignment of exports of SCOMET
items/software/technology under GAER to the SCOMET Division
of DGFT (Hqrs), New Delhi, via E-mail (scomet-dgft@nic.in) or on
the online portal of DGFT, on quarterly basis
GAER Policy (March/June/September/December), by the end of subsequent
month of each quarter, in respect of the exports made in the
previous quarter.
(b) Submission of Bill of Entry (wherever available), shipping bill
details, valid export license copy within the timelines mentioned
above.
30
(a) The Indian exporter shall submit post-shipment details
of each transfer/consignment of exports of SCOMET
items/software/technology under GAICT to the SCOMET
Division of DGFT (Hqrs), New Delhi, through online
system on DGFT website, on quarterly basis (March /
June / September / December), by the end of subsequent
month of each quarter, in respect of the exports made in
GAICT Policy
the previous quarter
(b) The post-shipment details shall be submitted in
proforma ANF 10D along with a copy of EUC in Appendix
10J(iv) within the timelines mentioned above, from the
foreign subsidiary company or foreign parent company /
another subsidiary of foreign parent company.
Sale/transfer by the stockist within the same country and
for reexport/re-transfer to the end users in countries, for
which, in-principle approval has been granted, the Indian
exporter/licensee shall submit details of all such transfers
Stock and Sale Policy to SCOMET Division of DGFT (Hqrs) in ANF-10B,
including EUCs[Appendix-10J(i), 10J(ii)as applicable] from
all ultimate end users and Bill of Entry into the ultimate
destination countries(for export outside the country of
stockist), within 3 months of every such transfer.
(i)EUCfrom all entities involved in the apply chain in the
prescribed proforma (Appendix 10J(i))duly signed and
stamped by the authorized signatory
GAED Policy (ii) Copy of Bill of Entry into the destination country
(iii) Agreement/Purchase Order
(iv)Post shipment details of each export/re-export done
under GAED .
(i)The Indian exporter shall submit post-shipment details of
each export/ re-export & Copy of the bill of entry into the
destination country within 30 days of delivery at
destination point.
GAEC Policy
(ii) It has to be done within 30 days of such export in the
prescribed format [ANF 10A along with the End-Use
Certificate (EUC) in the prescribed proforma [Appendix
10J (i) or (ii))
31
INDUSTRY COMPLIANCE
Internal Compliance Programme (ICP)
Companies and other organizations dealing with dual-use items are mandated to comply
with export control regulations. Effective control of exports to prevent the proliferation of
dual-use items is possible only if all the stakeholders, including manufacturers of dual-use
items, exporters and other organisations/stakeholders with the technical expertise or
knowledge on these items, recognize the need for such controls and support their
compliance with all the resources available to them. A trust-based partnership between
industry, other organisations/stakeholders and the government is vital to achieving this
shared objective of the non-proliferation of dual-use items. An industry or organization’s
expertise, including the knowledge of the technical characteristics of the items and
knowledge of the end-users outside India, plays a key role in the implementation of
export controls. To ensure necessary compliance, the Industry is expected to establish a
set of internal policies and procedures, also known as an Internal Compliance
Programme (ICP).
The elements specified below (based on the booklet ‘Elements of an Effective Internal
Compliance Program for Export/Transfer of Dual-Use Items’) provide a foundation for the
basic structure of an organisation’s ICP. The manner in which these elements may be
implemented depends on the size of the organisation, nature of its operations,
geographic location of the organisation, its subsidiaries and customers, nature of the
dual-use items that the organisation deals in, the potential end-use and end-users of
these dual-use items, etc.
Elements of an Effective ICP
Organisation Structure,
Management Training and
Responsibilities, and
Commitment Awareness
Resources
Classification and Physical and Technical
Recordkeeping
Screening Procedures Security
Reporting and Performance Review
Corrective Action and Audit
32
Indicative Checklist for ICP Document
Note: This is an indicative checklist that may be referred by the companies and other
organizations while instituting an Internal Compliance Program
Questions
Has the top-level management signed a statement committing to Internal Compliance
Procedures in the organization?
How is the risk analysis for the transaction of export-controlled items being performed?
Which risks are identified and how are they assessed?
Which department/unit in the organisation is the anchor of export controls and how is
this department/unit connected to other organisational units (organisational chart)?
Do employees have direct access to the Chief Export Control Officer(CECO) or any
other equivalent designation?
What rules are in place for the absence of export control staff in cases of sickness,
vacation etc.?
How is the responsibility for classification of items under the SCOMET list handled?
What procedures are in place to ensure that the classification of products/items under
the SCOMET list is kept up to date, and how is this documented?
Who can release a shipment that has been stopped due to concerns of non-compliance
with export control laws and regulations?
Does the organisation have an IT system for managing exports? If yes, what are the
main features of this system in relation to export control compliance?
Do the exportcontrol compliance-related employees in the organisation have access to
the textof the applicable export controllaws and regulations and the SCOMET list?
How are the organisational, process-related and work instructions in the export control
context made accessible to all the employees?
How does the organisation take into account the UNSC arms embargo or proliferation
related UNSC sanctions?
How is the end-use by the consignee/end-user and its reliability assessed?
How does the organisation handle red flags associated with export of dual-use items?
How does the organisation ensure that controlled items are not exported without a
license?
How does the organization ensure compliance with the Intangible Transfer of
Technology (ITT) requirements or other software/tech-specific issues (for example, e-
mail and access to the Intranet from abroad, cloud computing)? Has the organization
issued clear and written instructions in relation to ITT compliance?
33
What internal procedures are in place to ensure a final check before export that all the
required measures have been undertaken?
What internal procedures have been set in place to ensure compliance with the
conditions of the export authorisation or license?
Are the export control-relevant documents stored in accordance with the legal
provisions?
What system/procedures are in place to retrieve relevant recorded documents when
needed?
What trainings are conducted for employees associated with export control
transactions, how frequently do they take place and how are they documented?
How and for whom is awareness raised for risks associated with export of dual-use
items?
How frequently do audits of the organisation’s ICP take place and who performs such
audits?
How are discovered errors handled?
Do employees have access to a clear and written procedure for reporting potentialor
actual non- compliance?
What procedures are in place to investigate a reported incident of non-compliance?
What actions are taken as a responseto the confirmed non-compliance?
How does the organisation ensure physical security of the dual-use items? What are
the suitable premises-related and access control measures in place for providing
protection of dual-use items against unlawful entry/intrusion and to prevent
unauthorised access to restricted areas?
What are the appropriate measures in place for effective security relating to the
handling of goods and the conveyances used for the transportation of goods?
How does the organisation conduct appropriate security screening of
employees/personnel in security sensitive positions or having access to restricted
access areas?
How are the organisation’s IT or information security procedures and safeguards in
relation to the secured storage/protection of and access to dual-use items?
34
Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) Programme
The Indian Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) Programme was started in 2011 by
Customs (CBIC) to set standards for ensuring safety and security in the supply chain,
wherein an entity engaged in international trade is approved by Customs as compliant
with supply chain security standards and granted AEO status, enabling them to avail
certain benefits. The program has a membership of nearly 5000 AEO-certified entities.
Further details on the AEO program are available at:
https://www.aeoindia.gov.in/
An ICP certified by the Compliance Manager of the company or Government certified
such as AEO is a pre-requisite for obtaining the Global Authorisation for Inter-Company
Transfers (GAICT) scheme, General Authorisation for Export of Drones(GAED) of the
DGFT and Open General Export License (OGEL) schemes of the DDP.
An ICP within the organization or AEO certification may become a mandatory
requirement for the Indian exporter to apply for the various General Authorisation
schemes, as the Government liberalizes the export of other SCOMET items/technologies.
Therefore, the Industry and other relevant stakeholders must move towards ICPs or AEO
certification, to ensure that the essential elements and best practices are followed to
comply with the strategic trade control / export control related regulations.
35
WAY FORWARD
As we navigate through an era marked by rapid technological advancements and
changes in the security landscape, it is imperative to periodically assess the SCOMET
policy to ensure its effectiveness in balancing non-proliferation and trade considerations.
Directorate General of Foreign Trade(DGFT) in its efforts to facilitate trade is working with
the Industry to further streamline the SCOMET policy and procedures and introducing
General Authorisations and similar schemes for certain SCOMET items while ensuring
that necessary compliance including the documentary requirements are fulfilled, as per
our International commitments and national security considerations. Effective
enforcement of SCOMET policy at the borders will also remain a focus area.
Risk
Assessment &
Promoting
Effective
Make in India
Enforcement
Regular
Sector
Outreach &
Specific
Capacity Building
Policies
/ Training
Continuing to Promote Ease of
Harmonize Doing Business &
Streamlining
with Global
Regulatory
Standards
Processes
Incentivize
Compliance
Continuous engagement with Industry and other Stakeholders is needed to gain diverse
perspectives and align the policies with our rapidly growing industries and technological
advancement. In this context, there would be a focus on sector-specific policies for
promoting Make in India goods/technologies in sectors such as Telecommunications,
Information Security, etc. At the same time, it is expected that the Industry and other
Stakeholders would move towards Internal compliance and the institution of Internal
Compliance Programs(ICPs) within the organizations and work towards getting AEO
certified to make it easy for the Industry to take benefit of General license/authorization
schemes.
36
Important Links
1. The SCOMET policy is available on the DGFT website under “Regulations ->
Import, Export and SCOMET policy”.
2. The online process of filing a SCOMET application is outlined in the Trade
Notice No. 11 dated 28.07.2021
3. To raise awareness of the SCOMET category '0' licensing process widely
among relevant stakeholders, a list of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on
export control on nuclear-related items has been framed and uploaded to DAE
website (https://dae.gov.in/frequently-asked-questions-faq-on-theexport-control-of-
nuclear-related-items).
4. The DAE has also notified the "Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers (Exports)"
(https://dae.gov.in/acts-rules/) to regulate the exports of the Prescribed
Substances, Prescribed Equipment, and Prescribed Technology, as again notified
by the Department under the Atomic Energy Act of 1962.
5. The SOP of DDP has been simplified and may be referred at DDP’s website
(https://www.ddpmod.gov.in/).
DISCLAIMER: This document is only for informational /reference purposes and for
providing clarity to the Industry and other stakeholders regarding the relevant laws
and regulations of the Government of India.
For more information, kindly refer to Chapter 10 of Foreign Trade Policy 2023,
Chapter 10 of Handbook of Procedures 2023 & Appendix 3 to Schedule 2 of ITC
(HS)(SCOMET List as updated on 28.08.2023)
37
This document has been prepared by the Directorate
General of Foreign Trade with contributions from various
experts in the field of Strategic Trade Controls including
the Disarmament and International Security Affairs
Division of the Ministry of External Affairs, other
Government of India organizations and relevant Industry
stakeholders.
For Any Feedback or Queries, Please contact
Email: scomet-dgft@nic.in
Website: https://dgft.gov.in
Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Vanijya Bhawan,
16, Akbar Road, New Delhi, Delhi 110001