Government of India
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Department of Commerce
Directorate General of Foreign Trade
Vanijya Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 19th December 2022
Trade Notice No. 22/2022-23
To
1. All International Airlines
2. All Embassies and Consulates of India abroad
3. Pet Owners concerned
Subject: Guidelines for import of Pet Animals –reg.
1. Several requests are being received for clarifications regarding the import of Pet
animals (cats/dogs). In this regard, it is submitted that the import policy provisions for
‘other’ mammals including pet animals (cats/dogs) are as follows:
ITC (HS) Item Description Import Policy Policy Condition
01061900 - Mammals: -- Other Restricted Subject to Policy Condition 6 of
this Chapter.
Policy Condition (6): Import of Wild Animals (including their parts and products) as
defined in the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (as amended from time to time) is
prohibited and those species which are listed in CITES are subject to the provisions of
CITES.
Policy Condition(7): Import of dogs is allowed only for the following specific purposes: -
i. Pet dog with valid pet book and relevant records/documents in the name of importer.
ii. Dogs imported by the R&D Organisations for conducting research with the
recommendation of CPCSEA.
iii. For the internal security by the Defence and Police Force.
Policy Condition(8): Import of commercial dogs for breeding or any other commercial
activities other than the purposes mentioned above is not permitted.
2. Imports of Pet Animals may be through Cargo as well as part of Passenger baggage.
Reference the above-mentioned Import Policy provisions and in accordance with the
CBIC Circular No. 15/2013 Customs dated 08.04.2013, requirement of import
authorization is summarized as follows –
No. of pets
Up to two More than two
Permanent Import is allowed as passenger baggage, Import authorization from
imports without DGFT authorisation, only to DGFT is required. Prior to
persons transferring their residence to grant of an import
India after two years of continuous stay authorisation, applications
abroad. Only cats and dogs can be shall be submitted for
imported under baggage rules. examination based on the
Import authorization from DGFT is justifications along with
required if: supporting documents to
i. the period of continuous stay abroad DAH&D.
is less than 2 years, or
ii. the pet is not being transported as
passenger baggage, or
iii. pet cannot be imported under the
baggage rules
[Refer: CBIC Circular No. 15/2013-
Customs dated 08.04.2013]
Temporary Import authorization from DGFT is required. Prior to grant of an import
imports authorisation, applications shall be submitted for examination based on
the justifications along with supporting documents to DAH&D.
3. The following mandatory documents are required when applying –
Sl. Nature of Documents required
import
1. Permanent i. Vaccination Book/Pet Passport/Pet Book
Import ii. Certificate for Emotional Support
iii. Passport of the Pet
2. Temporary i. Vaccination Book/Pet Passport/Pet Book
Import ii. Certificate for Emotional Support
iii. Passport of the Pet
iv. Copy of return ticket or expected date of return
v. The local host/relative/family who must submit an undertaking
that in case the applicant/pet owner fails to take back the pet,
he/she shall be liable for action under the Foreign Trade
(Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 as amended from time
to time.
4. Steps to Apply for an import authorisation to DGFT are as follows:
An application for grant of an Import Authorisation may be submitted (as per ANF-2M of
the FTP) along with documents enlisted under Para 3. The application may be submitted
against their Importer Exporter Code (IEC), if the applicant has one. Alternatively, they
may apply against the permanent IEC No. IIHIE0153E, i.e., IEC for ‘Persons /Institutions
/Hospitals importing or exporting goods for personal use, not connected with trade or
manufacture or agriculture’.
This online application may be submitted on the DGFT Website (https://dgft.gov.in) by
navigating to → Services → Import Management System → Import Authorisation of
Restricted Items → Apply for a new Authorization
5. The Pet Owners travelling to India are advised to initiate the import authorisation
application process at least 2 months in advance of the travel dates.
6. It may be noted that any applications for trading/breeding purposes, or applications
made on behalf of some another person/ entity shall be duly rejected.
7. Import of pet animals is allowed only through airports and seaports of Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangalore and Kolkata. Where required, the animals shall also
be quarantined in the government quarantine station of the said ports for a stipulated
period.
8. The applicant should further obtain an Advance No Objection Certificate (NOC) from
the Regional Officer/ Quarantine Officer (AQCS) of the ports mentioned at point 7
above after submitting a copy of import license issued by the DGFT and a copy of
Health Certificate issued by the Veterinarian of the exporting country. The testing for
diseases as prescribed in the health certificate should be conducted in the exporting
country and all the test reports need to be accompanied with the animals. This NOC
needs to be obtained from the Regional Officer/ Quarantine Officer seven days before
the date of travel (relaxable up to 3 days depending on the specific circumstances).
Note: Before filling the request for advance NOC to AQCS, the applicant may ensure
the following compliances –
i. In case of Transfer of Residence: Stay abroad must be of more than two
years.
ii. In case of Re-import: Copy of earlier Veterinary Health Certificate for export
from India by AQCS in India is to be enclosed.
iii. In case of Short Stay in India: A valid import authorisation issued by DGFT
(https://dgft.gov.in)
9. All International Airlines are directed to ensure that the required
regulatory compliances are duly fulfilled prior to on-boarding of pet animals to avoid
challenges for their passengers/pet owners upon disembarking at destination.
Embassies of India abroad may also consider advising the travellers to India to seek
permissions/ licenses as per the procedure summarised above.
This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority.
(Md. Moin Afaque)
Deputy Director General of Foreign Trade
[Issued from File no. 01/89/180/200/AM-02/PC-2[A]/Part-I/E-31445]